# Handling Web Cache Validation with ETags

ETags _may_ be used to reduce bandwidth usage by preventing the contents of an
unmodified resource from being returned. An Ed-Fi REST API _should_ support such
cache validation through the use of the "If-None-Match" request header. If the
ETag value supplied in the request header still matches the existing resource,
the API _may_ respond with a 304 (Not Modified) status code with no response
body, rather than a 200 (OK) with the resource content.

## Implementing Bulk Operations

A REST API is one mechanism for bulk data loading into a data store. While other
possibilities abound, when a REST API bulk load API is provided, the
considerations in the following sections apply.

### **Security**

The bulk data portion of the Ed-Fi REST API _may_ use system user
authentication, but _must_ use application authentication. In addition,
installations _should_ use one or more additional authentication mechanisms
(such as client IP address restrictions, pre-shared certificates, or VPN access)
to further secure the bulk data transfer APIs where possible.

### Atomicity of Data

REST APIs are based on simple HTTP verbs and use the HTTP protocol for data
transfer. The HTTP PUT and POST verbs packet sizes can be limited by the web
server and client configurations. There is no size limit in the HTTP protocol
itself for PUT or POST operations, however practical limitations
exist.[\[16\]](#f16)

Packet sizes _should_ be limited to a reasonable maximum based on the
capabilities of the host system. All resource transactions are considered
upserts[\[17\]](#f17) and are idempotent; a single resource failure within a
packet does not invalidate the packet, but subsequent Resources from that packet
are processed. Failed uploads _may _be resubmitted, but are treated like a new
submission.

### Data Ordering

The potentially large quantity of transactions contained in a batch operation
introduces a design trade-off between reduced system responsiveness while the
batch operations are run and transactional operations are halted, or
transactional operations becoming intermingled with batch transactions.

The selection of a batch load strategy is an implementation concern. Either
approach has merit under appropriate circumstances.

### Scalability

Any API has the potential to be overwhelmed with operation requests where the
API depends upon data- or calculation-intensive resources. Relational data
stores, and most especially the referential integrity checks generally employed
in their designs, are data-intensive operations. Likewise, the other ACID
(Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) properties of a relational data
store transaction impose computation and data requirements that potentially
monopolize the repository resources, leading to intrinsic scalability concerns.

While NoSQL data stores do not have the same intrinsic design constraints, the
relational nature of the resources in the Ed-Fi data model means that incoming
data _must_ be verified for referential integrity before the data is accepted as
correct and is stored in a manner that is subsequently accessible to API
clients.

Whether relational integrity is verified using relational schema or
programmatically during bulk data ingestion, this process can be
resource-intensive in production systems. Bulk data packages _should_ be
accepted for processing without a validity check. Asynchronous processing _may_
then perform schema validation on the supplied data, and _must_ perform basic
data type validation and internal referential integrity checks before accepting
the data and subsequently making it accessible to API clients.

The batch _should_ be processed sequentially. Any operation failures within the
batch _should not_ halt processing of valid operations. The submitter _should_
be notified of any operation failures asynchronously.

The exact mechanisms for queuing are left to the implementation, but _should_
ensure transactional integrity, first-in/first-out (FIFO) ordering, and minimize
long connections and resource locks.

-----

<a name="f16"></a>16. Internet Information Server and Apache have a default file
upload limit of 2GB. Many browsers and frameworks often have this value as a
configurable limit as well.

<a name="f17"></a>17. A term representing a combination of an UPDATE (to
existing records) and INSERT (for new records) functionality, detailed
[here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merge_(SQL)).


## Ed-Fi API Design and Implementation Guidelines

* [Scope](../SCOPE.md)
* [Key Characteristics](../KEY-CHARACTERISTICS.md)
* [Requirement Levels](../REQUIREMENT-LEVELS.md)
* [API Design Guidelines](../API-DESIGN-GUIDELINES/README.md)
* [API Implementation Guidelines](../API-IMPLEMENTATION-GUIDELINES/README.md)
  * [Handling Authentication and Authorization](AUTH.md)
  * [Handling Non-Repudiation](NON-REPUDIATION.md)
  * [Handling Optimistic Concurrency with ETags](OPTIMISTIC-CONCURRENCY.md)
  * [Handling Web Cache Validation with ETags](CACHE-VALIDATION.md)
